# A Quick Start Guide of Formula One

Jan 2021



## Contents

1. [**Championship and Event Format**](#championship-and-event-format)
2. [**The Cars**](#the-cars)
3. [**The Teams**](#the-teams)
4. [**The Drivers**](#the-drivers)
5. [**The Tracks**](#the-tracks)
6. [**More Technical Concepts**](#more-technical-concepts)
7. [**Other Stuff**](#other-stuff)

## Championship and Event Format

The **FIA Formula One World Championship** runs annually from around mid-March to late-November or early-December (without COVID, that is). Currently 10 teams participate in the Championship, each team with 2 drivers.

The typical schedule for recent years consists of 21~23 race events, called "Grand Prix" (I personally prefer the French pronunciation *grahn-pree*). The Grands Prix usually happen every two weeks, but there are some back-to-back race weeks. 

### Grand Prix Events

Every Grand Prix happens from Friday to Sunday of the race week. The sessions are:

- Free Practice 1 (90 mins) and Free Practice 2 (90 mins) on Friday
- FP3 (60 mins) and Qualifying on Saturday
- Race on Sunday

#### Practice Sessions

The 3 Practice sessions have very little effect on the race results (unless, say, someone crashed the car late in FP3 and the mechanics couldn't get the car repaired for Qualifying). Teams fiddle with the setup of the car, such as wing and suspension angles, gear ratios and stuff, but these are of course confidential.

I hardly ever watch practice sessions live.

#### Qualifying

Qualifying is to determine the starting positions (i.e. the "grid") for the Sunday race. Qualifying is quite like a sprint: each driver tries to **set one very quick lap time** and compare this to the fastest lap time of every other driver. The drivers have multiple shots of doing so in each of these three smaller sections:

- Q1 (18 mins), all 20 drivers participate. The slowest 5 drivers (P16 to P20) are eliminated and cannot participate in Q2 and Q3. These drivers' starting grid positions are set.
- Q2 (15 mins), top 15 drivers from Q1 participate. The slowest 5 drivers (P11 to P15) are eliminated and cannot participate in Q3. These drivers' starting grid positions are also set.
- Q3 (12 mins), top 10 drivers from Q2 participate. This shootout determines the starting grid positions for P1 to P10. P1 is called "Pole Position".

#### Race

The Race is, of course, the glamorous main event of every race weekend. The race runs for a set number of laps (different for each circuit) but the total race distance for each race is always a little bit over 300km (186 mi) with one exception: the Monaco Grand Prix. The races generally take around 75 to 90 minutes to complete, barring any severe incidents causing stoppages.

Championship points are awarded to the drivers and teams each race based on race results:

| Finishing Position | P1   | P2   | P3   | P4   | P5   | P6   | P7   | P8   | P9   | P10  |
| ------------------ | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| Points             | 25   | 18   | 15   | 12   | 10   | 8    | 6    | 4    | 2    | 1    |

Also, the driver who does the **fastest lap in the race** will be awarded 1 extra point, but only if he finishes in the top 10.

The **Driver's World Champion** is whoever scores the most points over the season. Each team's points are the sum of the points of their drivers. The **Constructor's World Champion** is whichever team that scores the most points. That's pretty much it, no playoffs or any kind of all-star events like in North American sports.

## The Cars

## The Teams

## The Drivers

## The Tracks

## More Technical Concepts

Here are some of the important concepts in F1 racing that are a bit more technical. You can read it if you're curious but it's not absolutely necessary if you just want to understand what's going on and enjoy the race.

- **Slipstreaming**
  Slipstreaming is the act of closely following another car on the straights. You know how the leading car punches a hole in the air so there's less drag for the following car. The following car can get into the slipstream to gain a bit more speed, but there's this issue below ↓

- **Downforce and "dirty air"**
  F1 cars require downforce to be able to get around corners. This is the aerodynamic force generated by the wings and other body parts when at high speeds to push the car against the ground so the tyre rubber can work its magic. It is exactly the same principle as the wings of an airplane, just flipped on its back.
  Following the car too closely causes the air flow around the car to be disrupted (the air being "dirty") so it loses downforce, which severely affects cornering and braking performance. To try to solve this problem ↓

- **DRS (Drag Reduction System)**
  F1 introduced the DRS to mitigate this loss of downforce and to somehow "make up" for lost time. The DRS is a moveable flap in the rear wing that can be triggered to open on specific parts of the track (called DRS zones, usually placed on long straights, out of cornering sections). If the gap between two cars is less than 1 second when approaching the DRS zone, the following car is allowed to open the DRS so that air can pass **through** the rear wing instead of **over** it, thus reducing drag. This creates a bit of extra speed (in addition to slipstreaming) for the following car so it can attack the car ahead.

- **Understeer and Oversteer**
  Understeer is when the car doesn't turn into corners very well and runs wide. This is usually associated with the lack of front downforce. Oversteer is when the car turns too much into a corner and the back end becomes unstable or even swings around. This is usually associated with the lack of rear downforce. You can set up the wing angles to be steeper to increase downforce at the front or at the back, but then it sacrifices speed on the straights, because a steeper wing angle apparently blocks airflow and creates drag.

- **Undercut and Overcut**
  OK so now we are talking about race strategies.

  - Undercut: imagine you are stuck behind your rival and couldn't overtake him. You decide to pit **earlier** than your rival, come out with a fresh set of tyres, do a blisteringly fast lap while your rival is struggling on older tyres, and when he eventually does a pitstop you are already in front of him. So you swapped places with him without an on-track overtake.
  - Overcut: basically the reverse of undercut. You're stuck behind your rival and couldn't overtake him. You decide to pit **later** than your rival. Your rival does his pitstop but couldn't get the new tyres to work immediately, but you managed to squeeze out the final bits of performance on your used set of tyres, so when you eventually complete your pitstop, the lap time differences allowed you to get ahead of your rival without an on-track overtake.

  I believe undercuts are generally much more common, mainly because old tyres are supposed to be slower than new tyres, but there are lots of factors that affect tyre performance so it's not always the case.

  

## Other Stuff

- The grid positions may be changed after qualifying. If a driver or team violated the sporting regulations, such as blocking other drivers on the track, changing a car part that they're not allowed to change, etc., they may be penalized in the form of dropping places on the starting grid.
- All drivers have to do one mandatory pitstop during the race. F1 bans refueling during the race, so pitstops are pretty much only used to change tyres or front wings (if the wing is broken).
- If drivers violate rules during the race, such as causing a collision, 